For part two of our series on Democratic presidential candidates, we told the story of how Bernie Sanders learned to wield political power — not in the Senate or on the national stage, but in the town of Burlington, Vermont, all the way back in 1981.

He was a candidate for mayor, and, until then, had been a political failure in every race he’d run. But this time, he struck upon a winning strategy: finding people who had written off politics, talking to them in new ways and inspiring them to create a movement.

It’s the same strategy he has used ever since, with remarkable success.

To tell the story, we turned to our colleague Alex Burns, a “Daily” regular, who spent months investigating Sanders’s mayoral run. As with all our candidate profiles — including the one you heard last week with Pete Buttigieg and the episodes to come — the process began in our studio with a reporter interview that created the journalistic scaffolding for the episode.

At that point, we had no idea whether Sanders would agree to let us interview him, so we made sure Alex told us the entire story from start to finish.
Sign Up for The Daily Newsletter

Every Friday, get an exclusive look at how one of the week’s biggest news stories on “The Daily” podcast came together.

As it happened, about a month later, Sanders did agree to let us speak with him — for about 30 minutes at his hotel in Atlanta the morning after the last Democratic presidential debate. In the episode, you can hear him walk into the room along with his wife, Jane; introduce himself to me and producer Jessica Cheung; recount his 1981 campaign; and become unexpectedly frustrated when I asked him about traveling to Nicaragua as mayor. (We genuinely feared he was about to end the interview. He did not.)

Back in New York, Jessica and producer Alexandra Leigh Young, along with editors Paige Cowett and Lisa Tobin, set about weaving together what Sanders had told us with what Alex had told us, punctuating both with archival audio from the 1980s of Sanders at work as mayor (including a memorable moment from the local, man-in-the-street-style TV show Sanders created, aptly called “Bernie Speaks With the Community”).


The result is what you heard this morning.

Our profiles on Elizabeth Warren and Joe Biden are up next. Look out for them on Fridays.


“Every morning, when I dropped my kids off at school, I drove past a narrow road that led into a forest. It was said that deep in that forest, in a palace cut off from the world, lived a prince and a princess — the last surviving members of a Muslim royal family.”

In a special three-part series, reporter Ellen Barry tells us the story of what happened when, while on assignment in India, she got a phone call inviting her into that forest to meet Prince Cyrus and Princess Sakina.

Here are photos Ellen sent us of her time with Cyrus at his home, a 14th-century hunting lodge called Malcha Mahal in the woods of New Delhi. And if you haven’t heard “The Jungle Prince of Delhi” yet, listen here.
Image
Cyrus with Ellen at the Malcha Mahal.
Cyrus with Ellen at the Malcha Mahal.Credit...Ellen Barry/The New York Times
Image
On ‘The Daily’ this week

Monday: Why are so many hospitals suing their patients? Sarah Kliff spoke with a woman in Virginia who, after falling behind on medical bills for her daughter’s surgery, got a knock on the door from the sheriff.

Tuesday: Iran is experiencing its deadliest political unrest in decades. Farnaz Fassihi explains why the United States not only wanted that unrest, but also has helped fuel it.

Wednesday: Julie Davis on the new phase of the impeachment inquiry: Among Democrats, “there is some degree of worry that now is the part where things get really messy.”

Thursday: New data shows that 20 percent of American 15-year-olds don’t read as well as they should have at age 10. Dana Goldstein looks at the causes and consequences.

Friday: In the second episode of “The Candidates,” we talk to Bernie Sanders about his political roots. 




Today’s episode kicks off “The Candidates,” a new series from “The Daily” that profiles the four top-polling Democratic presidential contenders: Pete Buttigieg, Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren and Joe Biden. Producers Clare Toeniskoetter and Luke Vander Ploeg told us about how they approached the first episode:

For this series, we’re focusing on one defining moment in the lives of the top candidates, a moment that reveals who they are, explains what motivates them and helps us understand their political identity.

Four candidates. Four moments. Four episodes. Up first: Pete Buttigieg, the mayor of South Bend, Indiana.

Picking one moment for Buttigieg was difficult. At age 37, he hasn’t had a long political career or much time on the national stage. But as we dove into his life story, political correspondent Jeremy Peters brought us back to one of the elements that makes this campaign historic. Buttigieg is the first openly gay candidate for president of the United States with a chance of becoming his party’s nominee. What if we focused on his coming out story?

We wondered if this angle was too personal. But Jeremy pointed out that, in the case of Buttigieg, his coming out story captured a central tension in his political narrative.
Sign Up for The Daily Newsletter

Every Friday, get an exclusive look at how one of the week’s biggest news stories on “The Daily” podcast came together.

Much of the mayor’s biography can seem orchestrated for a presidential run: Harvard graduate, Rhodes scholar, veteran, Midwesterner. For most of his life, Buttigieg didn’t include his identity as a gay man in that public story. Unlike parts of his resume that seemed so carefully planned, this was beyond his control. And it was an identity that, for a long time, he didn’t believe could line up with his political ambitions.

His coming out story marked the moment when he chose to reconcile a carefully constructed public image with an important part of himself that he’d kept secret. That’s the moment we asked him to talk about for today’s episode.

When Buttigieg and his aides arrived at our recording studio, they’d just gotten off a long flight. They asked, first, for coffee. And then, after a photographer had taken a few pictures, Buttigieg settled into the studio with Michael. During a more than hourlong conversation, he told his story — one where being an out gay man has now become central to his political image.

As he says at the end of the episode, it’s strange for him to think that “the one thing that might have meant that it would be better not to have any aspirations related to politics at all could be the very thing that anchors the moral and emotional purpose of this entire campaign.”

While listening to the interview, we both were struck by his ease as a storyteller and his way of weaving the details of his life into a narrative. We’ll be looking to see how Buttigieg’s story of himself continues to play out on the campaign trail in the coming weeks, and whether Democratic voters will connect with it.


P.S. One candidate in our series has not yet agreed to sit down with us for an interview. Any guesses?



Reporter Astead Herndon did a little Beyoncé karaoke in Wednesday’s episode — and many of you took note. We asked Astead if we could share his full performance in today’s newsletter. Within seconds, he said yes. Listen here:
An Outtake From ‘The Daily’
Astead Herndon sings.
Image
Pomp and circumstance (but not too much)

Dan Powell, our engineer, on composing the theme music for “The Latest,” a new podcast about the impeachment inquiry:

Scoring a podcast is a balancing act. The music should complement the narrative without drawing too much attention to itself, and it should be interesting enough that you don’t get tired of it. As a composer, I’ve always been impressed by the way the theme song for “The Daily” achieves both.

For our new podcast series “The Latest,” I was tasked with rearranging the “Daily” theme song in a way that embodies the gravity of the impeachment hearings. The challenge was to do this without going overboard on the whole “Pomp and Circumstance” thing.

So I tried making the drums sound more booming and orchestral — more like something you’d hear in a concert hall. The electric piano part is revoiced with a viola, and the main melody is played on a cello, with long, sustaining notes that are a touch more somber than the original. The overall result is a regal, march-like iteration of the theme song that I hope communicates the historic nature of the subject matter while keeping us tethered to the sonic world of a New York Times podcast.

Look up any hit pop song from the last decade, and there’s likely a pared-down string quartet arrangement of it to be found. Listen to a few, and you’ll find that the best, most enduring songs are the ones that still have you tapping your feet, even when the layers of production and studio magic are stripped away. It’s a testament to the quality of the “Daily” theme song that it works so well even when we change it up. But will we ever have an episode that requires a tropical house remix? That’s yet to be determined, but I secretly hope we do.
On ‘The Daily’ this week

Monday: Amy Chozick on how the dream of WeWork crumbled — and why the man responsible for the wreckage walked away with more than $1 billion.

Tuesday: Corporations pledged investment in exchange for a $1.5 trillion tax cut. Jim Tankersley looks at whether that actually happened.

Wednesday: Astead Herndon followed Kamala Harris to South Carolina to understand how she went from a top-tier, front-runner candidate to middle of the pack.

Thursday: Nick Fandos on how Democrats and Republicans handled the most complicated witness in the impeachment inquiry to date: Gordon Sondland, who directly implicated President Trump in a quid pro quo, but whose reliability has been questioned.

Friday: In the first episode of “The Candidates,” Pete Buttigieg talks about how his lifelong political ambitions were complicated by the secret he kept for decades.






This week, Melbourne-based reporter Livia Albeck-Ripka worked with producer Lynsea Garrison to make a two-part series about the relatives of ISIS fighters. You heard the story of Kamalle Dabboussy, whose daughter and grandchildren are detained in Syria. But there are many others. We asked Livia to tell us about her experience meeting these family members:

When I first met Kamalle Dabboussy earlier this year, he insisted that nearly everything he told me remain off the record.

For months, Kamalle had been quietly trying to convince the Australian government to bring home his daughter and three grandchildren from the Al-Hol camp in Syria, where the families of ISIS fighters are detained. He was leading a contingent of more than a dozen Australian relatives, all holding a similar dark secret. Few of them wanted to talk.

We met at a Lebanese restaurant on the waterfront of an inner-western suburb of Melbourne, where, in a haze of hookah smoke, Kamalle strategized with the relatives of other detained women and a lawyer who had been assisting them. It was a few weeks later when, frustrated by the government’s inaction and desperate to get their loved ones home, they finally decided to go public.

First, Kamalle’s story aired on national media. Following President Trump’s announcement to pull troops from northeastern Syria, he held news conferences and did radio interviews, and allowed The Times to trail him to Parliament House in Canberra, Australia’s capital.
Sign Up for The Daily Newsletter

Every Friday, get an exclusive look at how one of the week’s biggest news stories on “The Daily” podcast came together.

Eventually, the other families began to open up, too.

Among them were John Crocket and Samer Safar, the grandfather and father of Janai Safar, a 26-year-old detained with her 3-year-old son in the Al-Hol camp. According to previous reporting by the Australian media, Janai chose to join the Islamic State, but she has since contested this.

When I met her family at a Sizzler restaurant outside Sydney last week, Samer said his daughter and grandson were in grave danger, and should come home. “My grandchild is not a terrorist,” he said.


John, an 86-year-old Korean War veteran, said that even if his granddaughter had willingly joined, she deserved due process and to be tried in Australia. “I’ve done my bit for my country, so let the government do something for me, to bring my granddaughter back,” John said. “That’s all I want.”
Image
Samer Safar, left, and John Crocket, with a photo of Janai Safar as a child.
Samer Safar, left, and John Crocket, with a photo of Janai Safar as a child.Credit...Livia Albeck-Ripka/The New York Times

As of today, while governments around the world debate the question of what they owe to citizens who joined a regime repudiating Western values, the Australian women and children remain in the camp.

Many of you have asked us to continue following what happens, and we will. I’ll stay in touch with Kamalle and the other families, and when there’s news, we’ll bring you the story.



In today’s episode, you heard our producer Jessica Cheung’s conversations with supporters of Bernie Sanders at his rally in New York. We asked Jessica what struck her most about these interactions:

“To some, the differences between Elizabeth Warren’s and Bernie Sanders’s candidacies may appear relatively small. Both are liberal populists, campaigning on the overhaul of an economic system they believe is not working for lower- and middle-income families. But when I went to the Sanders rally on Saturday, I was surprised by how, to his base, the gulf between these two candidates is vast — more than I realized. Sanders’s supporters insisted to me that these candidates are not similar, many of them contrasting the consistency of Sanders’s record with that of Warren, who was a Republican until 1996. They cited his protests during the civil rights movement; they cited her past work with corporations in legal cases. And some suggested that because of Warren’s past, she couldn’t be trusted (a claim Warren, of course, rejects). In their telling, only Bernie Sanders could truly transform our economic system.

“But when I asked one voter, Andy Schwartz, about Sanders’s ideological purity, he resisted the term. ‘I don’t know if it’s even pure. We don’t like that word. Because pure then becomes purity test — we don’t actually believe that purity tests are being applied to various Democratic candidates by people on the left. It’s about your ideas, your programs, your political record and your vision for this country. This isn’t a purity test,’ he told me. ‘We’re in a competitive primary election.’”