Kradon Zhao
Professor D’Auria
WR 120
25 October 2019
The Demon within Demonology: An Analysis of The Manchurian Candidate Through the Lens of Michael Rogin.
	The 1962 movie The Manchurian Candidate directed by John Frankenheimer overtly covers the topic of communism. In the film, an infantry platoon is captured and one of the soldiers, Raymond Shaw, is brainwashed to perform assassinations for the communist party. Major Bennet Marco attempts to foil the plot and undo the brainwashing but fails when Shaw commits suicide after shooting his mother Elanor Iselin, who is complicit with the communist party, and her husband, Senator John Iselin.  In his Michael Rogin’s “Preface.” Ronald Reagan the Movie and Other Episodes in Political Demonology, Rogin discusses the topic of political demonology and the countersubversive “that so often dominates American politics” (Rogin 13). To Rogin, political demonology is the “creation of monsters… by inflation, stigmatization, and dehumanization of political foes” with the countersubversive being used to combat these fabricated monsters. Rogin analyzes that the demonology was typically used within the political landscape in order to further or solidify one’s political position. The film articulates political demonology and the countersubversive in American political culture during the Cold War era through the McCarthy-like figure of Senator Iselin. However, Rogin fails to demonstrate how the employment of the political demonology impedes the progress of discussion within politics by shifting focus towards conflict in order to raise a person’s political standing. This in turn leads to the goals of the common people being disregarding, conflicting with the one of the foundations of democracy in which politicians are elected in order to represent the people who elected them and help put the people’s ideas on the political agenda.
	Senator John Iselin draws many parallels to Senator Joseph McCarthy, father of McCarthyism, which implemented tactics that involved political demonology against his foes in order to present a fictitious threat that would undermine the target’s credibility. Senator Iselin employs these McCarthy-like strategies, accusing specifically the Department of Defense of being corrupted. During the press conference, Iselin claims that he has a list of 207 people “who are known by the Secretary of Defense as being members of the Communist Party” within the Department of Defense. Similarly to Raegan, being the most “believable presence on the television screen, Iselin portrays and labels a group that is “distant from the experience” of the public as a threat on broadcasted television (Rogin 16). By labeling the department as complicit, Iselin destroys the current perceptions and reconstructs it, establishing a fictitious demonized image that threatens American society. The significance of the speech is that even though the claim is most likely bogus, Iselin was “soaring above the real,” permitting him to replace the department that his claims are representing (Rogin 16). No longer is the Department of Defense seen as functioning to protect America, but instead has been converted into the antithetical of what they were originally intended for, allowing for Iselin to take advantage of the situation and partake in the countersubversive.
	By politically demonizing the Department of Defense, Iselin is provided the opportunity to perform the countersubversive in an attempt to establish a greater position of power for himself. After identifying threats to society, Iselin becomes a countersubversive, someone who attempts to identify and eliminate subversive activities, otherwise known as threats. By becoming a countersubversive, Iselin is able to leverage a more favorable position on the political ladder by persuading the people to eliminate the threat within the Department of Defense that he established. Though not explicitly stating that he would clear the communists from the Department, he is producing the perception that it is his priority to eliminate the internal enemies of the country. When requested to verify the quantity of communists within the department, Iselin provides inconsistent numbers. Originally stating 207 communists, when asked again, he produces the number 104 and then finally responding with “275, and that’s all I have to say on the subject at this time” when asked one final time he before immediately exits the scene. Even though the claims are noticeably inconsistent, these inconsistencies actually distract the reporters from investigating the truth as the fabricated threats have been materialized within the minds of the viewers. Elanor discloses this as the reasoning for why Iselin needs to provide inconsistent numbers, explaining that the reporters are asking “‘how many communists are there?’” rather than “‘are there any communists?’” which keep the accusations from being exposed. These accusations that Iselin is directing towards the department enables the progression of his political career, but also impedes the progression of discussion within politics at the same time. 
Though Rogin effectively analyzes how demonology and the countersubversive was utilized within the scope of American politics and the Raegan administration, he fails to communicate the repercussions brought about by them and how they conflict with the ideas of democracy. When politicians create a fake image of a group and employs the countersubversive against them, they are detracting from the current discussion by highlighting an illusion and placing their own position as a higher priority on the agenda rather than focusing on achieving goals for the sake of the common people. Iselin also detracts from the political discussion when he employs demonology. When Iselin provides the inconsistent number of communists when asked to verify, the reporters then attempt to verify that claim, which only provokes the same exact question when presented with another distinct number. This in turn creates the circular discussion in which the reporters continuously investigate the “how many” without escape and orients the political discussion away from the topic of reality. The discussion has been directed away from the goals of the citizens of the country, but instead towards an internal conflict between Iselin and the “communists” within the department. This reorientation detracts from the focus of the conversation and demonstrates how the democratic system can be compromised. By utilizing the television, a symbol typically seen as democratic and warped it to spread fears of communism within the government. Iselin has taken advantage of the system, deceiving the people through the creation of hysteria in order to compel voters to place him into a higher position of power, ignoring what the common people would desire. Compared to the discussion within the Garden Club led by Dr. Yen Lo, there is a stark contrast in the focus within the scenes. 
	The movie’s garden club scene involves the brainwashing of the platoon by Dr. Yen Lo and heavily contrasts the press conference, and rather than bring to prominence a conflict within the governing body, the communist communicate their plans to achieve their goal of inducing chaos within American system effectively. The most initial difference between the scenes is the noise level. During the press conference, everyone is attempting to speak over each other, but during the garden club, only a single person is speaking at a given time. From there, the differences lie within the progression of the discussion during the scenes. In the scene, Lo demonstrates the brainwashing that he has performed on the platoon and discusses his intentions with the rest of communist within the hall. Compared to Iselin, who consistently accuses others, Lo develops the discussion in the direction of the goals for the whole country rather than attack those who are a part of the party. Lo and others also cites multiple scientific studies throughout the discussion in order to provide clarification on topics for those who are not completely informed of the situation. These studies include “Experiments in the Hypnotic Production of Anti-social and Self-Injurious Behavior” and “Experiments in the Hypnotic Production of Crime.” Iselin, the other hand, fabricates claims, which restricts him to fabricate additional false information or omit nonexistent information. This can be identified during the press conference in which he refuses to hand the Secretary of Defense the list, exclaiming that “You will not be getting your hands on this list!” By partaking in political demonology, Senator Iselin is forced to deceive others and limit the extent to which his audience, the American citizens watching, are informed in order to sustain his deception rather than supply precise information that everybody can access like the communist do. Rather than debate internally, the communists were able to discuss what their plans are for the future against what everyone considers their enemy. Though they do not partake in the democratic system, by not forming internal conflicts, they lead the discussion towards the common goal and advance the plans of the majority in the group. 
	Senator Iselin from The Manchurian Candidate is an articulation of how political demonology that was described in Michael Rogin’s “Preface.” Ronald Reagan the Movie and Other Episodes in Political Demonology was utilized within American politics during the time. However, Rogin fails to elucidate the effects the countersubversive and political demonology has on the progress of political discourse on topics that benefit the common people.
